Deadline to finish this course is '15th of October 2025' strict.

React - 

React is a JavaScript Library (Not a framework).
React is used to make web frontend applications.
React is mainly used to make Single Page Application (SPA).
It is developed by Facebook (Meta).
It's current version is React 19.
After React, we can easily learn React Native which is used for App Development (both ios and android).

To use react, we need Nodejs & npm to be installed in our pc
When you install Node js, it automatically installs npm as well.
To check node & npm versions
>node -v
>npm -v


Vite - 

Vite is used to install and setup React project, also to make project builds which can be deployed to production
Vite is fast development server and build tool
To install vite & create a new react project, go to your desired directory where you wants to create a new project and enter 
>npm create vite (Create new react project)
>cd projectName
>npm install (Install node modules)
>npm run dev (To run react website on specific port and get a url)


Diff between Framework and Library is that
Library's flow can be controlled by us but, framework has its own flow/rules, we need to follow that flow/rules only

JSX - JavaScript XML
TSX - TypeScript XML
SWC - Speedy Web Compiler


Files and their use in a React Project - 

package.json -> All the dependencies & devDependencies of our React Project are mentioned in this file.
package-lock.json -> All the nested dependencies of dependencies are stored in this file.
README.md -> It is a readme file in which we can store our project related info, like what it does, which function does what etc.
vite.config.js -> All the configuration of vite is present in this file.
eslint.config.js -> All the configuration of eslint is  present in this file.
.gitignore -> The files which we dont want to upload on git that fileNames/directoryNames are written in this file.

src directory -> This contains below files and assets directory

index.html -> This is entrypoint of browser which load main.jsx file.
main.jsx -> This will put entire react application in div tag present in index.html
App.jsx -> This file contains main App component and other sub components.
App.css -> is a css file which is used to give styling to our components.
index.css -> It is also a css file which is imported in main.jsx file.

assets directory -> It contains media files which should not be visible to anyone and are private.
public directory -> It also contains media files which can be available publically.
node modules -> All the packages & libraries used by our react app are present in node modules.


Components - 

Any website is made of multiple components like header, footer, navbar, main component etc.
When building UI using react, Everything is a component.
A component can contain multiple sub components.
Components name must start with capital letter.
To use component first we need to import it by writing -> import ComponentName from "./ComponentFile"
To use that imported component in our App component -> <ComponentName />
A component is nothing like a javascript function whose name starts with capital letter and which returns some html code. But function & component are not same.


JSX - JavaScript XML

JSX is a syntax extension for JavaScript that lets you write HTML-like markup inside a JavaScript file.


To upgrade or degrade the version of react in our react project -

1) Open package.json file from react project
2) Inside dependencies, change the react version to the version which you want to work with.
3) Delete the current node modules folder.
4) In terminal, run the command 'npm install' to install the node modules again of specified version. 
5) Now test whether your project works in that specified version, for that run 'npm run dev' command

In a dependency like "react": "^19.1.1", the caret (^) symbol indicates that the version can be updated to any minor or patch version within the same major version, meaning it would install version 19.x.x (such as 19.2.0, 19.2.1, or 19.3.0) but not a new major version like 20.0.0. This allows for automatic updates to bug fixes and performance improvements while preventing breaking changes from major version upgrades.


States -

State is a container to store some data just like variables.
States are mutable and dynamic.
To use states, we need to import them first (Variable dont need to import).
If you make any changes to that state, it re-renders react component automatically and updated values will be displayed on webpage.
State itself is a hook.


Hooks -

Hooks are the special features for functional component.
Hooks allow you to use different react features for your components, such as State, lifecycle methods, side effects etc.
Hooks names start with 'use', ex. useState, useId, useContext, useEffect, useRef, useReducer, useActionState, useFormStatus etc.


Uses of useEffect hook - 

1) To remove side effect from inside or outside component
2) To fetch data
3) Used as Life cycle methods
4) Used for DOM Manipulation and much more


Props -

Props are used to pass data to the components.
It is just like parameters we pass to the functions while calling functions, we can pass props while using any component.
Props can be passed as separate variables, object, array etc.


Controlled Components -

A controlled component is a component, which contains a html form (optionally) whose input fields (compulsory) are controlled by React state.
It stores input field value in state variable
Uses onChange event handler on input field
Value attribute of input field is attached with state variable.



Ways of styling in React using CSS

1) Inline style - We can write style attribute inside html elements, in which we can write css properties
2) External style - We can create separate css file and import it in component file
3) CSS Modules - This is similar to external css file, but ensures that styles are written for a specific component
4) Styled Components - Styled components is a library, by using we can directly write css inside JavaScript component (Not inside html element).
5) External framework - We can use frameworks like Tailwind css, React Bootstrap, Material UI etc to style the react components

Q. Can we use internal css in React?




Lifting state up - 

Sometimes, you want the state of two components to always change together. To do it, remove state from both of them, move it to their closest common parent, and then pass it down to them via props. This is known as lifting state up, and it’s one of the most common things you will do writing React code.

Consider a scenario, you have two child components in an App component. And you have to transfer data (state variables) from one component into another.
To do this you cant directly use data (states) from one component in another component, hence you need to declare state variables (data) in parent component
i.e. in App component, so that we can use them in both child components. This scenario is called Lifting state up.




Rules to be followed while creating custom hooks in react -

1) Name should start with 'use' keyword, ex. useHook(), useFetch() etc
2) Use hooks at top level of component, that means scope of hooks should be global within component. Ex. you should not use hook inside if block.
3) Don't call hooks inside conditions or loops
4) Don't call hooks after a conditional return statement
5) Don't call hooks in event handlers
6) Don't call hooks in class components
7) Don't call hooks inside try, catch or finally block
8) Don't call hooks from regular JavaScript function

1. You can call hooks inside functional components
2. You can call predefined or custom hooks inside custom hooks



Install Tailwind CSS in React

1) npm install -D tailwindcss postcss autoprefixer
2) npx tailwindcss init -p

There is some issue while installing the tailwind css, please resolve it.



































